README.md, before:

# AMP-Identifier: A Tool for Antimicrobial Peptide (AMP) Prediction and Analysis

```python
████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████
█▌                                                                            ▐█
█▌     _    __  __ ____            ___    _            _   _  __ _            ▐█
█▌    / \  |  \/  |  _ \          |_ _|__| | ___ _ __ | |_(_)/ _(_) ___ _ __  ▐█
█▌   / _ \ | |\/| | |_) |  _____   | |/ _` |/ _ \ '_ \| __| | |_| |/ _ \ '__| ▐█
█▌  / ___ \| |  | |  __/  |_____|  | | (_| |  __/ | | | |_| |  _| |  __/ |    ▐█
█▌ /_/   \_\_|  |_|_|             |___\__,_|\___|_| |_|\__|_|_| |_|\___|_|    ▐█
█▌                                                                            ▐█
████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████████

```

The **AMP-Identifier** is a Python tool for predicting and analyzing Antimicrobial Peptides (AMPs) from amino-acid sequences. It leverages a set of pre-trained Machine Learning models and offers flexible prediction modes, including an ensemble voting system, to provide robust results.

Beyond classification, AMP-Identifier computes and exports dozens of physicochemical descriptors for each sequence (via `modlamp`) and bundles them into a detailed report.

---


## Tool Workflow 

- [Input: FASTA file](#arguments)
  - processed by [AMP-Identifier CLI](#how-to-use-cli)
    - → [Physicochemical Feature Extraction](#key-features)
      - produces [features.csv](#outputs)
    - → [Model Inference](#how-to-use-cli)
      - via [Model Selection](#arguments)
        - run a [Single Internal Model (RF, SVM, GB)](#pre-trained-internal-models)
        - or enable [Ensemble Mode (Voting)](#arguments)
        - or add [External Model Comparison](#arguments)
      - produces [predictions.csv](#outputs)

---

### Quick Links Map

| Step / Artifact                         | See Section                               |
|---------------------------------------- |-------------------------------------------|
| Input FASTA                             | [Arguments](#arguments)                    |
| CLI usage                               | [How to Use (CLI)](#how-to-use-cli)        |
| Physicochemical feature generation      | [Key Features](#key-features)              |
| Model selection / flags                 | [Arguments](#arguments)                    |
| Internal models overview                | [Pre-Trained Internal Models](#pre-trained-internal-models) |
| Outputs (features.csv, predictions.csv) | [Outputs](#outputs)                        |



---

## Key Features

- **Multiple Internal Models:** Three pre-trained ML models (Random Forest, Gradient Boosting, SVM).
- **Ensemble Voting:** Majority vote across internal models to improve robustness.
- **Model Selection:** Choose a specific internal model on demand.
- **External Model Comparison:** Load external `.pkl` models for side-by-side comparison.
- **Feature Generation:** Compute and export an extensive set of physicochemical descriptors.

---

## Known Issues & Notes [!!!] 🐛

> *"Where there's code, there's bug (🪲)!"* 

### Potential Inconsistency in Charge (`charge`) Computation
- **Description:** A potential inconsistency was identified in the computed charge (`charge`) values during feature extraction.
- **Impact:** This affects one column in `physicochemical_features.csv` and may influence prediction performance to some extent.
- **Status:** Under active investigation. We are cross-checking `modlamp` documentation and contacting maintainers.
- **Recommendation:** Interpret the `charge` descriptor with caution until resolved. Overall model performance, particularly Random Forest, remains strong given the many other descriptors involved.

---

## Installation

We recommend using a virtual environment.

```bash
git clone https://github.com/madsondeluna/AMPIdentifier.git
cd AMPIdentifier

# Create the environment
python -m venv venv

# Activate (macOS/Linux)
source venv/bin/activate

# Activate (Windows)
# venv\Scripts\activate

# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

---

## Quick Test

Run a quick prediction using the sample data shipped with the repository:

```bash
python main.py \
  --input data-for-tests/sample_sequences.fasta \
  --output_dir ./test_results \
  --ensemble
```

If no errors occur and `test_results` is created with output files, your installation is working.

---

## How to Use (CLI)

The entry point is `main.py`.

### Arguments

| Argument               | Description                                                                 | Required | Default |
|------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|:--------:|:-------:|
| `-i, --input`          | Path to the input FASTA file                                                |   Yes    |   —     |
| `-o, --output_dir`     | Path to the output directory                                                |   Yes    |   —     |
| `-m, --model`          | Internal model to use: `rf`, `svm`, `gb`                                    |    No    |  `rf`   |
| `--ensemble`           | Enable majority-vote ensemble across all internal models                    |    No    |  Flag   |
| `-e, --external_models`| One or more paths to external `.pkl` models for comparison (comma-separated)|    No    |   —     |

### Examples

Single-model (Random Forest, default):
```bash
python main.py --input my_sequences.fasta --output_dir ./results_rf
```

Ensemble voting:
```bash
python main.py --input my_sequences.fasta --output_dir ./results_ensemble --ensemble
```

Compare SVM with an external model:
```bash
python main.py \
  --input my_sequences.fasta \
  --output_dir ./compare_svm \
  --model svm \
  --external_models /path/to/my_model.pkl
```

---

## Pre-Trained Internal Models

Three models are distributed and evaluated on the same dataset for fair comparison.

### Performance Summary

Best values per metric are in **bold**.

| Metric         | Random Forest (RF) | Gradient Boosting (GB) | Support Vector Machine (SVM) |
|----------------|--------------------:|-----------------------:|------------------------------:|
| Accuracy       | **0.8838**         | 0.8585                 | 0.5940                        |
| Precision      | **0.8903**         | 0.8665                 | 0.5828                        |
| Recall         | 0.8755             | 0.8475                 | **0.6611**                    |
| Specificity    | **0.8921**         | 0.8694                 | 0.5268                        |
| F1-Score       | **0.8828**         | 0.8569                 | 0.6195                        |
| MCC            | **0.7677**         | 0.7172                 | 0.1896                        |
| AUC-ROC        | **0.9503**         | 0.9289                 | 0.6377                        |

---

## Outputs

- `physicochemical_features.csv`: Detailed table of computed descriptors.
- `prediction_comparison_report.csv`: Final predictions, including a column for each model used.

---

## Training Your Own Models

Use the scripts under `model_training/`, especially `train.py`, to build and evaluate models on your datasets.

---

## Project Layout (Proposed)

```text
AMP-Identifier/
├── .gitignore                  # Instruct Git to ignore files (e.g., virtual env)
├── LICENSE                     # Software license (e.g., MIT)
├── README.md                   # Main project documentation
├── requirements.txt            # Python dependencies
├── main.py                     # CLI entry point for end users
│
├── amp_identifier/             # Main application package
│   ├── __init__.py             # Makes this directory a Python package
│   ├── core.py                 # Orchestrates the main prediction workflow
│   ├── data_io.py              # Input readers (e.g., FASTA)
│   ├── feature_extraction.py   # Physicochemical descriptor computation
│   ├── prediction.py           # Load .pkl models and run inference
│   └── reporting.py            # Generate .csv reports
│
├── data-for-tests/             # Example data for quick tests
│   └── sample_sequences.fasta  # Multi-FASTA with example sequences
│
├── model_training/             # Isolated module for training and evaluation
│   ├── __init__.py             # Package initializer
│   ├── train.py                # Train ML models
│   ├── evaluate.py             # Evaluate trained models and compute metrics
│   │
│   ├── data/                   # Training/testing data
│   │   ├── positive_sequences.fasta  # Positive (AMP) sequences for training
│   │   ├── negative_sequences.fasta  # Negative (non-AMP) sequences for training
│   │   ├── test_features.csv         # (Generated) Test-set features
│   │   └── test_labels.csv           # (Generated) Test-set labels
│   │
│   └── saved_model/            # Trained artifacts and evaluation outputs
│       ├── amp_model_rf.pkl          # (Generated) Random Forest model
│       ├── amp_model_svm.pkl         # (Generated) SVM model
│       ├── amp_model_gb.pkl          # (Generated) Gradient Boosting model
│       ├── evaluation_report.txt     # (Generated) Detailed text report
│       └── evaluation_report.csv     # (Generated) Comparative CSV report
│
└── tests/                      # Unit tests to ensure code quality
    ├── __init__.py             # Package initializer
    └── test_prediction.py      # Tests for prediction functions
```

---


## Contributors

### Lead Developer

- **Madson A. de Luna Aragão** — PhD Candidate in Bioinformatics, UFMG  
  Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil  
  **Responsibilities:** project lead, software architecture, ML pipelines, documentation.  
  **Contacts:** madsondeluna@gmail.com 

### Collaborators

- **Rafael L. da Silva** — Masters Student, UFPE — Collaborator  
  **Contributions:** data preprocessing, pipeline testing, literature review.

### Advisory Team

- **Ana M. Benko‑Iseppon, PhD** — Principal Investigator, UFPE — Advisor  
  **Contributions:** scientific supervision, study design, biological validation.

- **João Pacífico, PhD** — Principal Investigator, UPE — Co‑Advisor  
  **Contributions:** computational analysis review, dataset curation, evaluation protocol, reproducibility.

- **Carlos A. dos Santos-Silva, PhD** — Professor, CESMAC — Co‑Advisor  
  **Contributions:** structural biology expertise, evaluation protocol, benchmarking strategy, reproducibility.

---

### Quick Reference (tabular)

| Name                       | Role / Responsibilities                                   | Affiliation | Location         |
|----------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------|-------------|------------------|
| Madson A. de Luna-Aragão, MSc  | Lead developer; architecture; ML; docs                     | UFMG        | Belo Horizonte, BR |
| Rafael L. da Silva, BSc        | Collaborator; preprocessing; pipeline testing; lit. review | UFPE        | Recife, BR       |
| Ana M. Benko‑Iseppon, PhD | Advisor; study design; review, validation                  | UFPE        | Recife, BR       |
| João Pacífico, PhD        | Co-Advisor; computational review; evaluation       | UPE         | Petrolina, BR       |
| Carlos A. dos Santos-Silva, PhD      | Co‑Advisor; pipeline testing, review    | CESMAC        | Maceió, BR       |


---

## Funding & Acknowledgments

- This research was supported by **FACEPE** — Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de Pernambuco (Brazil).
- We thank our advisory and collaborator team for scientific guidance and technical feedback.

---

## Intellectual Property

- This tool is **under submission for registration** with the **INPI** — Instituto Nacional da Propriedade Industrial (Brazilian National Institute of Industrial Property).
- All rights reserved. Usage and distribution are subject to the project license terms.

---

## How to Cite

If this tool or its outputs support your research, please cite the repository:

```text
Luna-Aragão, M. A., da Silva, R. L., Pacífico, J., Santos-Silva, C. A. & Benko‑Iseppon, A. M. (2025). AMP-Identifier: A Python toolkit for predicting antimicrobial peptides using ensemble machine learning and physicochemical descriptors. GitHub repository. https://github.com/madsondeluna/AMPIdentifier
```

Commit message:

Rename AMP-Identifier to AMPidentifier in README

README.md, after:

# AMPidentifier: A Tool for Antimicrobial Peptide (AMP) Prediction and Analysis

```python

////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////
//                                                                    //
//                                                                    //
//      _    __  __ ____  _     _            _   _  __ _              //
//     / \  |  \/  |  _ \(_) __| | ___ _ __ | |_(_)/ _(_) ___ _ __    //
//    / _ \ | |\/| | |_) | |/ _` |/ _ \ '_ \| __| | |_| |/ _ \ '__|   //
//   / ___ \| |  | |  __/| | (_| |  __/ | | | |_| |  _| |  __/ |      //
//  /_/   \_\_|  |_|_|   |_|\__,_|\___|_| |_|\__|_|_| |_|\___|_|      //
//                                                                    //
//                                                                    //
////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////

```

The **AMPidentifier** is a Python tool for predicting and analyzing Antimicrobial Peptides (AMPs) from amino-acid sequences. It leverages a set of pre-trained Machine Learning models and offers flexible prediction modes, including an ensemble voting system, to provide robust results.

Beyond classification, AMPidentifier computes and exports dozens of physicochemical descriptors for each sequence (via `modlamp`) and bundles them into a detailed report.

---


## Tool Workflow 

- [Input: FASTA file](#arguments)
  - processed by [AMPidentifier CLI](#how-to-use-cli)
    - → [Physicochemical Feature Extraction](#key-features)
      - produces [features.csv](#outputs)
    - → [Model Inference](#how-to-use-cli)
      - via [Model Selection](#arguments)
        - run a [Single Internal Model (RF, SVM, GB)](#pre-trained-internal-models)
        - or enable [Ensemble Mode (Voting)](#arguments)
        - or add [External Model Comparison](#arguments)
      - produces [predictions.csv](#outputs)

---

### Quick Links Map

| Step / Artifact                         | See Section                               |
|---------------------------------------- |-------------------------------------------|
| Input FASTA                             | [Arguments](#arguments)                    |
| CLI usage                               | [How to Use (CLI)](#how-to-use-cli)        |
| Physicochemical feature generation      | [Key Features](#key-features)              |
| Model selection / flags                 | [Arguments](#arguments)                    |
| Internal models overview                | [Pre-Trained Internal Models](#pre-trained-internal-models) |
| Outputs (features.csv, predictions.csv) | [Outputs](#outputs)                        |



---

## Key Features

- **Multiple Internal Models:** Three pre-trained ML models (Random Forest, Gradient Boosting, SVM).
- **Ensemble Voting:** Majority vote across internal models to improve robustness.
- **Model Selection:** Choose a specific internal model on demand.
- **External Model Comparison:** Load external `.pkl` models for side-by-side comparison.
- **Feature Generation:** Compute and export an extensive set of physicochemical descriptors.

---

## Known Issues & Notes [!!!] 🐛

> *"Where there's code, there's bug (🪲)!"* 

### Potential Inconsistency in Charge (`charge`) Computation
- **Description:** A potential inconsistency was identified in the computed charge (`charge`) values during feature extraction.
- **Impact:** This affects one column in `physicochemical_features.csv` and may influence prediction performance to some extent.
- **Status:** Under active investigation. We are cross-checking `modlamp` documentation and contacting maintainers.
- **Recommendation:** Interpret the `charge` descriptor with caution until resolved. Overall model performance, particularly Random Forest, remains strong given the many other descriptors involved.

---

## Installation

We recommend using a virtual environment.

```bash
git clone https://github.com/madsondeluna/AMPIdentifier.git
cd AMPIdentifier

# Create the environment
python -m venv venv

# Activate (macOS/Linux)
source venv/bin/activate

# Activate (Windows)
# venv\Scripts\activate

# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

---

## Quick Test

Run a quick prediction using the sample data shipped with the repository:

```bash
python main.py \
  --input data-for-tests/sample_sequences.fasta \
  --output_dir ./test_results \
  --ensemble
```

If no errors occur and `test_results` is created with output files, your installation is working.

---

## How to Use (CLI)

The entry point is `main.py`.

### Arguments

| Argument               | Description                                                                 | Required | Default |
|------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|:--------:|:-------:|
| `-i, --input`          | Path to the input FASTA file                                                |   Yes    |   —     |
| `-o, --output_dir`     | Path to the output directory                                                |   Yes    |   —     |
| `-m, --model`          | Internal model to use: `rf`, `svm`, `gb`                                    |    No    |  `rf`   |
| `--ensemble`           | Enable majority-vote ensemble across all internal models                    |    No    |  Flag   |
| `-e, --external_models`| One or more paths to external `.pkl` models for comparison (comma-separated)|    No    |   —     |

### Examples

Single-model (Random Forest, default):
```bash
python main.py --input my_sequences.fasta --output_dir ./results_rf
```

Ensemble voting:
```bash
python main.py --input my_sequences.fasta --output_dir ./results_ensemble --ensemble
```

Compare SVM with an external model:
```bash
python main.py \
  --input my_sequences.fasta \
  --output_dir ./compare_svm \
  --model svm \
  --external_models /path/to/my_model.pkl
```

---

## Pre-Trained Internal Models

Three models are distributed and evaluated on the same dataset for fair comparison.

### Performance Summary

Best values per metric are in **bold**.

| Metric         | Random Forest (RF) | Gradient Boosting (GB) | Support Vector Machine (SVM) |
|----------------|--------------------:|-----------------------:|------------------------------:|
| Accuracy       | **0.8838**         | 0.8585                 | 0.5940                        |
| Precision      | **0.8903**         | 0.8665                 | 0.5828                        |
| Recall         | 0.8755             | 0.8475                 | **0.6611**                    |
| Specificity    | **0.8921**         | 0.8694                 | 0.5268                        |
| F1-Score       | **0.8828**         | 0.8569                 | 0.6195                        |
| MCC            | **0.7677**         | 0.7172                 | 0.1896                        |
| AUC-ROC        | **0.9503**         | 0.9289                 | 0.6377                        |

---

## Outputs

- `physicochemical_features.csv`: Detailed table of computed descriptors.
- `prediction_comparison_report.csv`: Final predictions, including a column for each model used.

---

## Training Your Own Models

Use the scripts under `model_training/`, especially `train.py`, to build and evaluate models on your datasets.

---

## Project Layout (Proposed)

```text
AMPidentifier/
├── .gitignore                  # Instruct Git to ignore files (e.g., virtual env)
├── LICENSE                     # Software license (e.g., MIT)
├── README.md                   # Main project documentation
├── requirements.txt            # Python dependencies
├── main.py                     # CLI entry point for end users
│
├── amp_identifier/             # Main application package
│   ├── __init__.py             # Makes this directory a Python package
│   ├── core.py                 # Orchestrates the main prediction workflow
│   ├── data_io.py              # Input readers (e.g., FASTA)
│   ├── feature_extraction.py   # Physicochemical descriptor computation
│   ├── prediction.py           # Load .pkl models and run inference
│   └── reporting.py            # Generate .csv reports
│
├── data-for-tests/             # Example data for quick tests
│   └── sample_sequences.fasta  # Multi-FASTA with example sequences
│
├── model_training/             # Isolated module for training and evaluation
│   ├── __init__.py             # Package initializer
│   ├── train.py                # Train ML models
│   ├── evaluate.py             # Evaluate trained models and compute metrics
│   │
│   ├── data/                   # Training/testing data
│   │   ├── positive_sequences.fasta  # Positive (AMP) sequences for training
│   │   ├── negative_sequences.fasta  # Negative (non-AMP) sequences for training
│   │   ├── test_features.csv         # (Generated) Test-set features
│   │   └── test_labels.csv           # (Generated) Test-set labels
│   │
│   └── saved_model/            # Trained artifacts and evaluation outputs
│       ├── amp_model_rf.pkl          # (Generated) Random Forest model
│       ├── amp_model_svm.pkl         # (Generated) SVM model
│       ├── amp_model_gb.pkl          # (Generated) Gradient Boosting model
│       ├── evaluation_report.txt     # (Generated) Detailed text report
│       └── evaluation_report.csv     # (Generated) Comparative CSV report
│
└── tests/                      # Unit tests to ensure code quality
    ├── __init__.py             # Package initializer
    └── test_prediction.py      # Tests for prediction functions
```

---


## Contributors

### Lead Developer

- **Madson A. de Luna Aragão** — PhD Candidate in Bioinformatics, UFMG  
  Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil  
  **Responsibilities:** project lead, software architecture, ML pipelines, documentation.  
  **Contacts:** madsondeluna@gmail.com 

### Collaborators

- **Rafael L. da Silva** — Masters Student, UFPE — Collaborator  
  **Contributions:** data preprocessing, pipeline testing, literature review.

### Advisory Team

- **Ana M. Benko‑Iseppon, PhD** — Principal Investigator, UFPE — Advisor  
  **Contributions:** scientific supervision, study design, biological validation.

- **João Pacífico, PhD** — Principal Investigator, UPE — Co‑Advisor  
  **Contributions:** computational analysis review, dataset curation, evaluation protocol, reproducibility.

- **Carlos A. dos Santos-Silva, PhD** — Professor, CESMAC — Co‑Advisor  
  **Contributions:** structural biology expertise, evaluation protocol, benchmarking strategy, reproducibility.

---

### Quick Reference (tabular)

| Name                       | Role / Responsibilities                                   | Affiliation | Location         |
|----------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------|-------------|------------------|
| Madson A. de Luna-Aragão, MSc  | Lead developer; architecture; ML; docs                     | UFMG        | Belo Horizonte, BR |
| Rafael L. da Silva, BSc        | Collaborator; preprocessing; pipeline testing; lit. review | UFPE        | Recife, BR       |
| Ana M. Benko‑Iseppon, PhD | Advisor; study design; review, validation                  | UFPE        | Recife, BR       |
| João Pacífico, PhD        | Co-Advisor; computational review; evaluation       | UPE         | Petrolina, BR       |
| Carlos A. dos Santos-Silva, PhD      | Co‑Advisor; pipeline testing, review    | CESMAC        | Maceió, BR       |


---

## Funding & Acknowledgments

- This research was supported by **FACEPE** — Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de Pernambuco (Brazil).
- We thank our advisory and collaborator team for scientific guidance and technical feedback.

---

## Intellectual Property

- This tool is **under submission for registration** with the **INPI** — Instituto Nacional da Propriedade Industrial (Brazilian National Institute of Industrial Property).
- All rights reserved. Usage and distribution are subject to the project license terms.

---

## How to Cite

If this tool or its outputs support your research, please cite the repository:

```text
Luna-Aragão, M. A., da Silva, R. L., Pacífico, J., Santos-Silva, C. A. & Benko‑Iseppon, A. M. (2025). AMPidentifier: A Python toolkit for predicting antimicrobial peptides using ensemble machine learning and physicochemical descriptors. GitHub repository. https://github.com/madsondeluna/AMPIdentifier
```
